---
title: Projects
published: true
---

# Projects

## Feedback on the Web: What is "Good"?

We encounter feedback mechanisms on the web, wherver we go. On Twitter, we know a Tweet is "good" if people Favorite it, or Retweet it. On Stack Overflow, people "upvote" good answers. 

Think about the last time you received feedback on the web. Did the feedback help you achieve your goal? Share your experiences on the [forum](http://community.p2pu.org/t/what-is-good-feedback/1292) and lets figure out what good feedback looks like from experience.

## Help Others with Your Sharp Feedback Skills

Go to the ['New Course'](http://community.p2pu.org/c/new-courses) category and pick a course to give feedback on. Structure your feedback as follows: 

1. Say specifically what you like about the course. Is the topic interesting? Do the exercises reflect the goals of peer learning? 
2. Ask for clarification on things that you don't understand or don't agree with. 
3. Make suggestions after hearing the answers to your clarification questions.

We call this "red - yellow - green" feedback, which you'll soon see in action in badges.

## Create a P2PU Badge to Prompt Feedback and Recognize Mastery

Badges are a good way to facilitate feedback on projects in a course. Design a badge for every project in your course. You can create a badge on [badges.p2pu.org](https://badges.p2pu.org), and get a feel for how they work with our [Badge Maker](https://p2pu.org/en/courses/653/p2pu-badge-maker/) course.

Some good example badges to look at are: 

### WikiSOO Burba Badge
<iframe id="badge_embed" type="text/html" frameborder="0" height="310" width="210" src="//badges.p2pu.org/en/badge/view/22/embedded/?rendering=normal"></iframe>

### Deeper Learning
<iframe id="badge_embed" type="text/html" frameborder="0" height="310" width="210" src="//badges.p2pu.org/en/badge/view/323/embedded/?rendering=normal"></iframe>

### I Walked with #WALKMYWORLD
<iframe id="badge_embed" type="text/html" frameborder="0" height="310" width="210" src="//badges.p2pu.org/en/badge/view/347/embedded/?rendering=normal"></iframe>

To add your badges to your course, you should grab the embed code from the badges page by clicking on the embed button and paste the code into a seperate section in your module called "badges." [Here's some detailed directions to help you embed your badge anywhere on the web](http://info.p2pu.org/2013/07/16/announcing-new-ways-to-use-badges-p2pu/).

This is an example of what the embed code looks like:

{% highlight html %}
<iframe id="badge_embed" type="text/html" frameborder="0" height="310" width="210" src="//badges.p2pu.org/en/badge/view/3/embedded/?rendering=normal"></iframe>
{% endhighlight %}