---
title: Modules
published: true
---

# Modules

Course-in-a-Box organizes course content using **modules** and **submodules**. 

**Modules** index your course material into broad sections (topic, weeks, etc.) and appear in the top menu of the website to guide learners through the material. **Submodules** make up the modules and hold the content. 

<br>

#### Default Modules

The default modules for CIAB are *Setup*, *Content*, and *Customize* which will appear in the menu bar above. In your GitHub repository, there's a folder called `modules` which contains a folder corresponding to each of these default modules. Inside each of these folders is another folder called `_posts` which contains your submodules (`.md` files). 

[https://github.com/your-github-username/course-in-a-box/blob/gh-pages/modules/](https://github.com/your-github-username/course-in-a-box/blob/gh-pages/modules/)

<br>

#### Creating New Modules

Adding a new module starts by creating the first file that will live in that module.

To create a module called **introduction**: 
* Open the `modules` folder (link above)
* Click the *Add File* > *Create new file* button which will take you to a page with a text box asking you to name your file
* Enter the text `introduction/_posts/2000-01-01-test.md` into the box. 
  *You should see "introduction" and "_posts" convert to folders while `2000-01-01-test.md` remains as the file name
* Scroll to the bottom of the page and commit your change 

This will generate a new module called "introduction" with a subfolder called "_posts" that contains a file (aka a submodule) called `2000-01-01-test.md`. 🎉! However, this will remain hidden from public view until you add it to the course menu.

<br>

#### Updating Modules in the Menu
To edit the modules that appear in the menu across the top of your CIAB website, you'll manually update the list of module names in `_data/course.yml`.

[https://github.com/your-github-username/course-in-a-box/blob/gh-pages/_data/course.yml](https://github.com/your-github-username/course-in-a-box/blob/gh-pages/_data/course.yml)

Change the line containing:

`modules: [tutorial, resources, references]`

to include the name of your new module:

`modules: [introduction, tutorial, resources, reference]`

You can also remove or rearrange these however you'd like. Commit your changes, wait a minute or two, then refresh your course website to see the updated menu!

<br>

#### Deleting Modules

The primary way to delete a folder on GitHub is to clear out all of its files: as soon as a folder is empty, it will automatically disappear. To delete a module, you'll need to remove all of the files inside one-by-one by opening them, hitting the trash icon, and committing the change.

Fortunately, a module won't appear if its name isn't listed in your `course.yml` file, so you can leave our default folders in your GitHub repository without impacting your final course. 

