---
title: "Projects"
layout: course_page
---

# Projects 

## Project 1: Get to know this community.

During signup you were asked for your name and a twitter handle. Take some time and look at the other folks who signed up. Consider following those that tweet about things you are interested in. Send some tweets and start a conversation. If relevant, tag with #sociallearning

This course is nestled in a larger community of people interested in creating open online learning experiences for everyone! How about introducing yourself on [community.p2pu.org](http://community.p2pu.org/t/please-introduce-yourself/28)?

<a class="twitter-timeline"  href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/p2pu"  data-widget-id="484738746420453376">#p2pu Tweets</a>

<script>!function(d,s,id){var js,fjs=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],p=/^http:/.test(d.location)?'http':'https';if(!d.getElementById(id)){js=d.createElement(s);js.id=id;js.src=p+"://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js";fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js,fjs);}}(document,"script","twitter-wjs");</script>

## Project 2: Think about the community for your course?

How will people join your community? What type of community will you build for your course? Will it be a community of interest, practice or inquiry? Will you add a personality to your community? Will the community stay alive after the course is done? What tools will you use to build your community? Can you think of advantages and drawbacks these tools may have?

Share your thoughts with the rest of the group.

{% include disqus.html %}
